# Automatic Event Detection in Text
This repository contains my Master thesis for Information Retrieval and Knowledge Discovery program at FMI, Sofia University.

The research subject of the master thesis are the tasks of event detection and event extraction - challenging tasks from the field of natural language processing, in this particular case considered in the context of the fight against disinformation.

The event detection task aims to determine what type of event is mentioned in a given text and what its trigger word is. The event extraction task further seeks to give answers to the questions Who?, What?, When?, Where?, Why?, How? about the event, i.e. to detect and classify its arguments.

The aim of the master thesis is to develop a method and a software prototype that recognizes events from a predefined set in a text, as well as to propose a methodology for extending the proposed set with new event types.

In the master thesis a detailed overview of the existing approaches for event detection and event extraction is made. Based on the conclusions from it, the Text2Event approach is chosen for further research. The selected Text2Event model is pre-trained on data from the ACE2005 corpus. In the present study, the pre-trained model is first applied to data extracted from a non-relational database of fake news debunks - the Database of Known Fakes (DBKF). The aim is to find out what events from the ACE2005 classification occur in them.

A methodology is developed to extend the set of recognized events by defining three new event types - Cure-Claim, Severe-Weather and Rule-Change. For each of the newly defined event types, data extracted from the DBKF is selected. Annotation guidelines for the new event types are developed and based on them the new EXTEND corpus is created. Since manual data annotation is a laborious and slow process, the size of the new corpus is relatively small, which is also one of the main challenges at hand.

The Text2Event model pre-trained on the data from ACE2005 is fine-tuned on the data from the new corpus EXTEND. Supervised machine learning techniques are applied. Experiments are conducted to investigate the importance of the amount of training data used and the number of training epochs. The results show the effectiveness of the approach based on the performance of the fine-tuned models on both the new EXTEND event types and the ACE2005 event types. Experiments are also conducted with the large language model LLaMA-2 (specifically LLaMA-2-70b-chat, which has 70 billion parameters). A zero-shot approach is applied. The results show that for classifying the type of event that occurs in a given text, the two studied approaches perform similarly well (with the given instructions to LLaMA-2). For event argument classification, however, the fine-tuned Text2Event models demonstrate better performance.

Based on the results of the experiments and the analysis done, a fine-tuned Text2Event model is selected, which simultaneously performs best in recognizing events of the new types from EXTEND and  the old types from ACE2005. The model is used as the main part of a software prototype of a system for automatic event detection in text.
